Diagnosing the Learner in Difficulty
Teaching undergraduate and postgraduate
learners is often a joy. What to
do with a student who is not meeting
expectations, however, is challenging.
Clinical attending physicians must identify,
and remediate, students who
struggle. This article presents a practical
approach to identifying, diagnosing,
and managing the learner in difficulty.
DEFINING AT-RISK STUDENTS
A learner in difficulty is a student at
risk for receiving less than “pass”
because of concerns regarding his or
her knowledge base, clinical skills, or
professionalism.1 Learners in difficulty
rarely self-identify for a variety of reasons,
including lack of self-awareness
or concern that if they acknowledge
they are in difficulty, they will be
stigmatized.2 However, early identification
of such individuals, with appropriate
intervention, seems to lead to
better outcomes for these learners.3
The responsibility of identifying learners
who are not meeting expectations
largely rests with their clinical teachers.
THE CHALLENGE FOR CLINICAL
TEACHERS
Many teachers hesitate to identify and
report learners experiencing difficulties
for a number of reasons, including
inexperience handling such situations,
concern they are misjudging the circumstances,
lack of documentation,
fear of retribution by the student, and
the time required to resolve issues.4–6
The current nature of training further
compounds this problem. Oversaturated
placements, shorter duty hours and
academic half days, and concurrent exposure
to multiple supervisors reduce
student contact with clinical teachers.
Problems often go unidentified until
a critical incident has occurred.6
THE APPROACH
Just as we all have an approach to a
child who presents with a cough, it is
helpful to have a basic approach to a
learner who is not meeting expectations.
Teachers are good at recognizing
a student not doing well but
have difficulty deciding what to do
next. We propose that the steps
should be analogous to those of
a physician confronted with a coughing
patient: consider a differential
diagnosis, take a focused history,
observe, and define a management
plan.
CASE
Julie is a fourth-year medical student
working as an acting intern. The supervising
resident reports that Julie
seems distracted and disorganized,
and has a weak knowledge base. The
clinical attending has noticed that she
appears distracted and disinterested
but has not appreciated any knowledge
deficits. Julie’s interactions with
other members of the health care
team have been acceptable.
Recognizing that Julie is not meeting
the expectations, the clinical attending
needs to develop a differential diagnosis
for why Julie is struggling
(Table 1). Taking a careful history of
a learner such as Julie and gathering
focused observations will narrow the
differential and help the attending
decide on a working diagnosis and
therapeutic plan.
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL
The reasons why learners struggle are
diverse and are often not academic in
origin.7 Moreover, unlike a clinical
differential, in which there is usually 1
explanation for the patient’s presentation,
the struggling learner may be
dealing with several issues. Learning
is relational; thus, to determine what
may be causing problems for a
learner such as Julie, it is important
to consider what, if any, interactions a
student may be having in the learning
context that could be interfering with
his or her performance. When constructing
a differential diagnosis of
a learner in difficulty, the acronym
“K-Salts” (knowledge, skills, attitude,
learner, teacher, system)2 is useful.
This approach allows the attending to
think not only of the skills, attitudes,
and behaviors of the learner but also
to consider the impact of the environment.
TAKING THE HISTORY
When talking to a student who is not
meeting expectations, start with openended
questions to determine his or
her level of insight into problems and
potential causal factors. As the conversation
progresses, some key areas
to explore include:
1. Academic history: to determine how
well the student is handling the academic
requirements of training
(eg, study habits, competing priorities
such as research projects,
call requirements).
2. Social circumstances: to determine
if any recent or ongoing life stressors
are interfering with learning
(eg, financial, child care issues, illnesses
in the immediate or extended
family).
3. Wellness: to determine if there are
any new or previously known physical
and/or mental health issues that
are contributing to the concerns
identified.
4. Academic relationships: to determine
if relationships with other students
or attitudes of teachers may be impeding
success.
5. Learning context: to identify if any
organizational or systems issues
are interfering with learning (eg,
inconsistent supervision, poor role
modeling, overcrowded learning
environments, geographically dispersed
teaching sites).
A CONVERSATION WITH JULIE
MIGHT REVEAL THE FOLLOWING:
Julie is married and has a 2-year-old
son who attends day care near her
home. Her husband works full-time. She
has a 1-hour commute to work and
finds it hard to be there on time to pick
up her son from day care. Furthermore,
her son has been ill, requiring her
husband to miss work, and she has
been up late at night. She is having
difficulty balancing her personal and
professional responsibilities and is
stressed that she is not doing a good
job either at home or at work. Julie
feels rushed and tired, and she finds it
hard to organize her day. She has never
experienced this before and is embarrassed
that the team has noticed.
OBSERVING THE STUDENT
Although the history is critically important
to understanding Julie’s issues,
observation enables the attending to
better understand the learner’s performance.
Observing Julie admitting an infant
with failure to thrive might reveal the
following: Julie has a good rapport
with the mother but takes a scattered
history. She writes her admission note
before entering any admission orders,
resulting in a delay. Her presentation
during rounds is not well organized,
and her differential diagnosis for the
failure to thrive is rudimentary.
MAKING THE DIAGNOSIS
Julie is having difficulty balancing her
home and professional life; in addition,
she has problems with organization
and prioritization, and has knowledge
deficits. Although Julie’s problems are
multifactorial, the clinical attending
now has a much better understanding
of the issues and can offer specific
suggestions for improvement.
MANAGEMENT
In addition to offering specific advice,
the clinical attending has 2 other critical
responsibilities. First, the teacher
must document the concerns and what
has been done about them, in as much
detail as possible (ie, dates, specific circumstances,
conversations with other
members of the health care team).
Second, the clinical teacher should
notify a responsible authority in the
medical student or residency program.
In this way, the teacher can learn if this
is an isolated incident or a trend, and
greater resources for intervention may
be available.
HELPFUL TIPS
If the learner identifies personal
health issues as a contributing factor,
guide him or her to the Student
Affairs or Wellness office.
Ask for help. The clerkship director,
residency program director,
education site leader, or associate
dean will want to assist you and
the learner.
Know your school’s regulations
and guidelines about struggling
or failing students. Know whom
to contact. Know the supports that
are available to both you and your
students.
You discuss Julie’s situation, and she
highlights the multiple issues involved.
You suggest that Julie seek
advice from the Student Affairs office,
and she agrees that this is a good
plan. You also suggest some resources
to increase her pediatric knowledge.
Together, you agree that you will speak
to the pediatric Clerkship Director to
convey your concerns about the impact
of her long commute on her
learning. Julie wonders if she could be
transferred to the community hospital
that is closer to her home; you agree
that this would be a good plan.
CONCLUSIONS
As clinical teachers, we have an obligation
to both our profession and
society to identify, and assist, students
who struggle to meet the standards
expected of them. The good news is that
close to 90% of students labeled as
“learners in difficulty” succeed after
implementation of a structured intervention,
especially if they are involved
in developing the remediation
plan